Full version here: Schaefer, R. (2019). [Revitalized Community Curriculum Breathes New Life into the Webs First Virtual Organism](). Mozilla Open Leaders blog.  

The OW/DW Curriculum is both an online educational curriculum and a community-building tool. Our project addresses three long-term goals:
1) uniquely positioning our organization in terms of online education, 2) integration with our other educational assets to serve organizational needs and 3) to serve as a conduit for strengthening community ties.  

* Online education. One goal of OW/DW Education is to offer both learning and pedagogical opportunities around topical themes and project content. We can establish a niche in the online education environment by providing unique topics while also providing a unique perspective on these topics. We will be using a combination of longer course syllabi, shorter tutorials, and a range of supporting materials.  

* Organizational integration. The second goal of OW/DW Education is to integrate more formal educational opportunities with our existing educational and scientific assets. In particular, we would like to integrate our digital badge content with our simulation environments and open datasets to provide a more reflective experience for current and potential contributors alike.  

* Community-building. The third goal of OW/DW Education is as a community-building function. Our curriculum will serve as an educational catalyst (e.g., what contributors need to know or that they are missing from conventional materials) and as a contribution catalyst (what is a minimal amount of knowledge needed to make advanced contributions).  

Our community has been developing educational resources for several years. Concurrently, we have been trying to improve the state of community participation. This project was started to bolster or educational mission while also using these resources to improve community engagement. The curriculum itself consists of several components. These include online courses with multiple assignments, general educational resources, and tutorials. Some of these resources are unique and relevant to research being done in the OpenWorm Foundation (Developmental Data Science), while other resources (the Pattern Formation tutorials) are a more general treatment of developmental biology instruction. People from inside and outside the OpenWorm community are welcome to utilize (and contribute to) these resources.  

The target audience for this curriculum is a college-level interest in computational developmental biology, although anyone who is interested in the topic should be able to complete these lessons successfully. In terms of being a content contributor, there are several ways to do this. One of these is general feedback on the lesson plan. Those with a background in the topical area or online education might contribute by creating additional content. People can also contribute by promoting the content on social media or by developing lesson-specific graphics and animations.  
