### Category Theory in Development
(excerpts from "Data-theoretical Synthesis of the Early Developmental Process". in _Neuroinformatics SI: NeuroCommons_)

We seek to build a systems theory of development, one that will lead us to more formal representations based on category theory and anticipatory biology. Our initial analysis of _C. elegans_ development provides a means for building this representation. We define quantitative constructs such as cell families, which provides a path to mathematical representation. Rosen [1] proposes {_M,R_} systems (metabolism, repair) as a mathematical representation of living systems. As biology is an adaptive, there are many mechanisms at the cellular and molecular level that act to anticipate various phenomena, from environmental stresses to intercellular signals. The development of an anticipatory system suitable for the generative nature of development (de novo production of new cells and tissues) has great potential utility.  

Developmental processes can be characterized as an anticipatory {_R,D_} (replication and differentiation) system. We can work towards building a relational system by demonstrating trends in the data, transforming these trends into categories, then describing a classification system that sheds new light onto the biology and process of embryonic development. To build a formal representation adaptive responses, we must first identify relational systems, or information that allows us to map from one set of components to another. One example involves quantitative representations  of  cells in space and time. These include both identity relations (attributes of the cell) and developmental processes. These identity processes can include changes in global state over time, or changes in the genetic program over time. For example, the appearance of various terminally-differentiated cells occur in batches, while these batches acquire functional categories upon terminal differentiation that can change throughout the lifespan. This potentially allows us to define precursor events in a rigorous manner, or events that force cells to change category, and ultimately change their phenotypic state. 
 
Another potential relational system involves the definition and use of cell families. While cell families exist in time, they also exist as the consequence of a series of transformations. Once cells are terminally differentiated, they exist in categories that make them different from cells in other families. Dynamic changes in gene and protein expression across adulthood [2] can result in cells being sorted into new categories without an appreciable change in anatomical role. While the cell families defined in Supplemental File 4 are based on existing cell nomenclature, they can also exist as categories which can expand in developmental time. This dynamic expansion results from cell division (replication), which in turn is driven by the differentiation of developmental cell lineages. In this way, cell families define the basis for an {_R,D_} system. 


{_M,R_} systems have been criticized as being an incomplete way to segregate the core functionality of living systems, particularly as a means to move beyond biological mechanism isolated from its ecological context [3]. Rather than providing an avenue to realistic simulation, relational representations such as the {_M,R_} system are descriptions of autonomous systems that lead to non-computable models [4]. Are these criticisms valid because of the anticipatory nature of relational models generally, or due to the broad nature of categorical parameters _M_ and _R_? By contrast, {_R,D_} systems can be represented as mappings between two narrower categories (replication and differentiation) that are specific to a smaller slice of biological variation (development). Aside from these criticisms, {_R,D_} systems also allow us to compose phenotypes from cells, which are themselves allowed to change categories in a more restricted manner.  
 
The process of cellular differentiation leads to two distinct categories: developmental cells that are not differentiated, and terminally- differentiated cells that exhibit some (but not all) attributes of cells found in the adult. But we can also have duality of categories in terms of axial differentiation (e.g. anterior-posterior), or in terms of emerging asymmetry (left-right). The data analyses provided here demonstrate some of the basic parameters necessary for constructing such categories.  
 
We can also proceed a step further and apply the logical structure of category theory [5] to represent these properties. The formalization of categories includes objects that constitute sets and arrows that define functions within those sets. Examples of objects include terminally-differentiated cell families, functional cell groups, and birth-time cohorts. Functions that constitute formal biological categories include phenomena such as cell division events, changes in spatial location, and transitions of an object through the developmental process. Each of these categories do not exist in isolation, and can intersect in a number of ways. Developmental plasticity, even in a so-called deterministic organism such as C. elegans, requires flexible categories with functional operators.  
 
An additional advantage to thinking about the embryo category-theoretically is the ability to utilize a concept called compositionality to understand the morphogenetic process. In this case, compositionality allows us to piece together events from trends in familial classifications. This can range from the number of cells differentiated at a given point in time, or proportions of cells in a given functional class. We also propose that there is the value in using concepts such as functors and natural transformations [6] as a way to capture categorical transformations due to cell division and differentiation. As a way to express relations between biological nomenclature and anatomically-based categories, functors are defined in category theory as mappings of objects that preserves both composition and identity. Operating at a higher level of complexity, natural transformations provide the ability to reconfigure categories of functors while preserving their structure. This is useful in the developmental application domain, where we might view the role of cell differentiation as a functor between the categories of developmental and terminally-differentiated cells, and the role of natural transformations as a means to represent variation in the differentiation process across various functional cell types.  

By combining sets (categories) and arrows (functors), category theory also allows for the identification of initial and terminal objects for use in establishing formal modeling relations. We can also see how combining developmental biology with categorical thinking casts developmental cell differentiation in a new light. In particular, cell differentiation produces a series of new categories linked to both nomenclature identity and explicit positions and orientations in two dimensional space. What makes this approach powerful is that nomenclature can be decoupled from these other attributes without destroying the information content of these classificatory structures. Other structures such as organismic sets and supercategories might also be used to clarify relational processes not explicitly tied to nomenclature. While the analysis presented here provides insights into a relatively simple developmental system (_C. elegans_), applying such a formalism to similar data in more complex developmental contexts will advance the relational biology approach, and strengthen our ability to predict and understand these systems.  

__REFERENCES:__  
[1] Rosen, R. (1985). Anticipatory Systems; Philosophical, Mathematical, and Methodological Foundations. Springer, New York, USA.

[2] Hammarlund, M., Hobert, O., Miller, D.M., & Sestan, N. (2018). The CeNGEN Project: The Complete Gene Expression Map of an Entire Nervous System. _Neuron_, 99, 430-433.
 
[3] Cottam, R., Ranson, W., & Vounck, R. (2007). Re-mapping Robert Rosen's (_M,R_)-systems. _Chemical Biodiversity_, 4(10), 2352-2368. 
 
[4] Chemero, A. and Turvey, M.T. (2008). Autonomy and Hypersets. _Biosystems_, 91(2), 320-330. 
 
[5] Spivak, D.I. (2014). Category Theory for the Sciences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
 
[6] Thiry, L., Zhao, H., and Hassenforder, M. (2018). Categories for (Big) Data models and optimization. _Journal of Big Data_, 5, 21.
