## A New Kind of Developmental Neuroscience  

Over the past decade, there has been an explosion of quantitative, high-throughput data generated by a host of new measurement technologies. Public access to these data provides information on a host of phenomena from behavioral to genomic, which allows for biological processes at multiple scales to be more fully characterized. Perhaps even more importantly, these data are also being utilized by a broader community of scientists, which results in new opportunities for discovery. Yet despite the explosion of data and its availability, there is a need for synthesis of these data at the systems level. Developmental neuroscience can thus be represented as part of a broader set of differentiation processes. This can not only lead to new scientific discoveries, but also result in new forms of scientific practice such as open-source computational biology.  

In this talk, I will draw from work being conducted in the DevoWorm group (http://devoworm.weebly.com) to demonstrate how this new kind of developmental neuroscience can proceed. By integrating multiple sources of data into a framework of computational modeling and analysis, we can demonstrate global processes in the developing nervous system as well as undiscovered phenomena related to developmental/newly-differentiated cells and emerging neural systems. Understanding the nervous system and developmental processes by using approaches such as developmental networks/connectomics, the analysis of biological dynamics, and comparisons among a diversity of model organisms contributes to a richer developmental neuroscience. Bringing together diverse sources of biological data also leads us to new insights related to biological emergence and the complexity of cellular systems. Understanding neurobiological systems in this way has empirical value in terms of defining novel functional relationships, the nature of spatiotemporal complexity at multiple scales, and perhaps even new biological laws. We will conclude with considering how this work provides innovations in model-building, visualization and open-source science.  
