## Game Theory of Developmental Processes

Developmental processes are dynamic and complex, and can be viewed from the perspective of interacting agents. Developmental agency at multiple organizational scales can be understood as ontogenetic agency, which enables an approach called developmental game theory. Ontogenetic agents taking the form of cells, morphogens, gene products engage in a developmental process and produce coherent states that ultimately result in the formation of strategies. The interactions between these states (in the forms of competition or cooperation) can be characterized in a game model. These strategies rely upon natural features such as developmental constraints and trade-offs rather than requiring a conventional decision-making apparatus. Ontogenetic agents can however still engage in autonomous and collective behaviors. A series of game-theoretic models suited to select problems in development will then be reviewed. These include different classes of game used to model different aspects of development: 0-player, single-player, n-player, and combinatorial. We will then discuss the broader dynamics of these games, such as equilibria, computational complexity, and evolutionary games. In addition to toy examples, these models will then be extended to systems, evolutionary equilibria, and homeostatic/allostatic regulation. In conclusion, we will consider how developmental game theory models provide a means to better understand the phenomena of cellular and biological decision-making.
