## Raising the Connectome: the emergence of neuronal activity and behavior in _C. elegans_

The field of connectomics has provided opportunities to view the structure and function of the nervous system in a new light. The proliferation of data for small connectomes such as those found in the nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_ [1] allows us to study the connected nervous system at both the single cell and systems level. In this paper, this perspective will be used to better understand the potential functional role of ion channels among terminally-differentiated neurons present at various points in embryogenesis. Based on secondary data collected from numerous sources on the differentiation and developmental process [2], these partial connectomes can be reconstructed and analyzed for biases that potentially deviate from the 302-cell adult hermaphrodite connectome. Based on these partial patterns of adult connectivity, generalizations can be made with respect to the behavioral features of a developing connectome [3]. 

A parallel area of inquiry involves exactly when and under what conditions these terminally-differentiated neurons begin to produce organismal-level behaviors. One way to unify these sets of questions is by developing an inferential approach that makes reasonable assumptions about development from data collected in adult animals. _Caenorhabditis elegans_ is the perfect choice for this approach due to its straightforward developmental trajectory. An abundance of quantitative data also allows for inference to proceed using the lineage tree and adult end state in tandem to simulate intermediate developmental phenotypes. This paper will build on the work done in [2], where the construction of partial connectomes for multiple time points in embryonic development demonstrates how the neuronal networks emerge in the embryo from developmental cells and maps to terminally-differentiated cells observed in the adult phenotype. Using these partial connectomes along with ion channel expression and activity data at the single cell level, we can map potential behaviors to neurons. Once these relationships are established, it is then appropriate to discuss under what conditions ion channels get expressed. To make the connection between molecular biology, cell biology, and behavior, analogies can be made using both adult neuronal function and artificial brains such as those found in Braitenberg Vehicles [4].  

This analysis in this paper will involve four basic components. The first of these involves an analysis of cells at different points in time [5], allowing for an inventory of the various tissue and organ types represented by newly differentiated neurons. Ion channel data collected from WormBase [6] will be used to identify key genes, associated cells, and annotations. Determining the relationships between functional gene identities, specific ion channels, and functional annotations will be enhanced by using a data set developed at the OpenWorm Foundation [7-8]. This analysis yields information regarding ion channel types present at a specific time point in embryogenesis. In terms of the latter, the data set featured in [9] can be used in conjunction with annotation metadata and embryonic gene expression information to draw conclusions regarding the phylogenetic and developmental origins of the connectome. Of particular interest is the link between ion channels expressed by neuronal cells present in the embryo and the lineage-specific expression of ion channel-related and other associated genes. The final component relies upon how stereotypical _C. elegans_ behaviors are heavily influenced by genetics to establish a link between the presence of certain neurons and the potential for early forms of chemosensation, thermosensation, and even learning and memory [10]. 

References:
[1] White, J.G., Southgate, E., Thomson, J.N., and Brenner, S. (1986). The structure of the nervous system of the nematode _Caenorhabditis elegans_. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 314(1165), 1-340. doi:10.1098/rstb.1986.0056

[2]Alicea, B. (2017). The emergent connectome in Caenorhabditis elegans embryogenesis. BioSystems, 173, 247-255. 

[3] Kaiser, M. (2017). Mechanisms of connectome development. Trends in Congitive Science, 21(9), 703-717.

[4] Braitenburg, V. (1984). Vehicles: experiments in synthetic Psychology. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[5] Alicea, B., Gordon, R., and Banerjee, A. (2018). Dataset: Embryo networks and connectomes in Caenorhabditis elegans. doi:10.17605/OSF.IO/Q9JVB. https://osf.io/q9jvb/ 

[6] Lee, R.Y.N., Howe, K.L., Harris, T.W., Arnaboldi, V., Cain, S., Chan, J., Chen, W.J., Davis, P., Gao, S., Grove, C.,  Kishore, R., Muller, H-M., Nakamura, C., Nuin, P., Paulini, M., Raciti, D., Rodgers, F., Russell, M., Schindelman, G., Tuli, M.A., Van Auken, K., Wang, Q., Williams, G., Wright, A., Yook, K., Berriman, M., Kersey, P., Schedl, T., Stein, L., and Sternberg, P.W. (2018). WormBase 2017: molting into a new stage. Nucleic Acids Research, 46(D1), D869–D874. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx998

[7] Sarma, G.P., Lee, C-W., Portegys, T., Ghayoomie, V., Jacobs, T., Alicea, B., Cantarelli, M., Currie, M., Gerkin, R.C., Gingell, S., Gleeson, P., Gordon, R., Hasani, R.M., Idili, G., Khayrulin, S., Lung, D., Palyanov, A., Watts, M., Larson, S.D. (2018). OpenWorm: overview and recent advances in integrative biological simulation of _Caenorhabditis elegans_. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 373, 20170382. doi:10.1098/rstb.2017.0382.

[8] Curation of selected resources are courtesy of Vahid Ghayoomie of the ChannelWorm project (https://github.com/openworm/ChannelWorm/) sponsored by the OpenWorm Foundation (http://openworm.org). 

[9]Packer, J.S., Zhu, Q., Huynh, C., Sivaramakrishnan, P., Preston, E., Dueck, H., Stefanik, D., Tan, K., Trapnell, C., Kim, J., Waterston, R.H., Murray, J.I. (2019). A lineage-resolved molecular atlas of _C. elegans_ embryogenesis at single cell resolution. biorXiv, doi:10.1101/565549.

[10] Walker, D.S., Chew, Y.L., and Schafer, W.R. (2018). Genetics of Behavior in _C. elegans_. In "The Oxford Handbook of Invertebrate Neurobiology". J.H. Byrne ed., pgs. 1-38. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190456757.013.5
