The evolutionary transition to multicellular life in the form of cellular aggregates and embryos is marked by a need to form internal networks for oxygen and nutrient transfer between cells. Intercellular networks can take the form of vascular networks, but even this relies on the configuration of cells in morphologies of a particular shape. How does this requirement constrain evolution and development? To answer this, we can utilize a tool from graph theory: Euler paths. Consider that multicellular aggregates form a graph where each edge represents the boundary between two cells. When these networks represent a complete Euler cycle, then they can be said to be equistatic, meaning that each edge is both permeable and representative of an equal number of transfer points. We speculate that equistatic networks are representative of single multicellular entities (or modules) that emerge in the development and evolution of such structures. This can lead to one of two outcomes. In one case, Euler completeness is an upper bound to complexity of phenotype in which non-complete parts of the cycle are analogous to a budding or functional segregation. In the latter example, we see the establishment of new phenotypic modules, which can result in the emergence of highly complex and asymmetric phenotypes. We can further evaluate single shapes that replicate according to duplication and transformation events using a phylogenetic analysis. We find that while simply repeating shapes yields little modular complexity, the application of transformation rules leads to a number of interesting results such as evolutionary dead-ends and the evolution of complex traits. This work forces us to revisit the work of D'Arcy Thompson and the mathematics of growth and form, as our network structures ultimately relate to the geometry and topology of phenotypes and their lineages.  
