The OpenWorm Foundation is dedicated to creating the world’s first digital organism in an Open-Source/Open Science manner. The DevoWorm group is an affiliated research unit advancing research in Computational Developmental Biology, Data Science, and Machine Learning. We would like to develop documentation infrastructure in the form of a secure workspace ecosystem that will allow us to encourage community standards and analytical reproducibility. 

This project will build upon the work that will be advanced during this year's Google Summer of Code, which will result in a user front-end for our ML/AI education and research efforts. A documentation infrastructure sitting below the hood of this front-end will aid us in our mission of offering integrated instruction and research engagement. During the Season of Docs, the intern will work on two components:

1) A secure workspace for data storage and manipulation. Users should be able to access data from our organizational collection (DevoZoo) as well as submit new sources of data for inclusion into the collection. We would also like for there to be some sort of interface with various social media channels (Twitter, ResearchGate, Github, Slack) to share papers and insights as necessary to enable group learning and research insight.

2) An interface to present analysis options to users of varying skill levels. This includes building upon an interface that guides users (often with limited expertise in ML/AI) through the relevant assumptions and overall suitability of different algorithms and classes of analysis for their particular problem. The interface should be documentation-rich, meaning that users should be able to access documents related to community-standards and further information about each type of analytical tool in our library. Accompanying this will be the development of a computational notebook template allowing users to access Wiki resources and share lab notes across analyses. 

The successful applicant will attend our group meetings and interact with a diverse community of collaborators. Contacts: Bradly Alicea [balicea@openworm.org](mailto:balicea@openworm.org), Stephen Larson [stephen@openworm.org](mailto:stephen@openworm.org), Vinay Varma [vinay.n.varma189@gmail.com](mailto:vinay.n.varma189@gmail.com).
