### Process as Connectivity: towards biology-specific complex networks

Does spatial connectivity provide inferential guidance in understanding the developing phenotype and nervous system? The answer may be found in both the embryo and the developmental origins of the connectome. Using _C. elegans_ as an example, we will establish a connection between spatial connectivity, developmental cell sublineages, and the adult nervous system. To demonstrate how each of these processes contribute to the adult connectome, we propose a five-dimensional spatial representation (_x,y,z,t,i_), where _t_ is depth in the developmental time and _i_ is a cell’s differentiated state or location in a lineage tree.

Despite the discontinuity of these empirical observations, we can nevertheless identify potential functional relationships between a generic developmental cell interactome network and an emerging neuronal network (connectome). Of particular interest are temporal relationships between newly-differentiating cells and growth of the connectome also become apparent. Global connectivity patterns often do not conform to a typical mathematical model of connectivity. Therefore, we will also discuss the relationship between network connectivity derived from biologically-relevant spatial relationships and default complex network models such as scale-free and random networks. Taken collectively, these comparisons yield information regarding relationships between developmental lineages, differentiation, and connectivity.
