## GSoC Project: Physics-based XML Model-building for the Mosaic Embryo

**Description:** The DevoWorm project is building a physics-based simulation of mosaic embryogenesis, with application to the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This initiative will focus on incorporating secondary data from nematodes and (for early development) other species such as sea squirts into an XML-based computational framework. The model-building will result in an XML specification of embryo physics that describes a developmental process of your choosing. If time permits, this specification will be used to build trees and networks that describe relationships between individual cells. This will provide the host organization with an informatics framework for understanding neural precursor cells and developing nervous systems.

**Aims:** The current focus is on XML-based model-building for representing mosaic development in the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. This model will ultimately be executable in either CompuCell3D (from CC3DML) or WormSim (NeuroML). Depending on the student’s interests, they might be interested in either early development (developmental cell lineages in CC3DML) or later development (the transition from developmental cell lineage to terminally-differentiated connectome using the NeuroML). The internship period will consist of two parts: building models of the function and physical interactions between cells (in XML), and building tree and graphical representations from these models (using tools such as GraphViz and Gephi). Your proposed timeline should include working on the XML model first, and then move toward creating tree and network visualizations. Both the CC3DML and NeuroML options have a longer-term arc, and the applicant would be encouraged to contribute beyond the formal "Summer of Code". These models would fill a critical gap in the DevoWorm project, namely the ability to simulate the physical constraints and intercellular signaling potential within whole embryos among systems that exhibit deterministic cellular differentiation.

**Skills:** open source development experience with languages such as XML, C++, and Python. An interest in the underlying biological processes is essential, and applicants with strong abstract thinking abilities are preferred. This involves a willingness to take a "whatever works, works" philosophy, and encourage critical thinking. Good communication skills and familiarity with open science practices are expected.

**Mentor:** Bradly Alicea [balicea@openworm.org](mailto:balicea@openworm.org)
